Introduction, Background,  Cisco Certification and its Impact

Introduction and Background

Hello Everyone! First and foremost I would to thank Sir Tony Co and the faculty of Computer Studies Department for giving me the opportunity to share my experience with Cisco certification and how it jump-started my career as an IT professional specializing in Networking. 

This career path is also very high rewarding depending on how much effort and planning you put into it and I will discuss later  what are the opportunities waiting for you should you decide to take this path, what career tracks can you take if you have the fundamental knowledge especially having the Cisco certification.

Introducing myself, I am a career shifter. I took up a course totally unrelated to IT and worked in the Call Center industry for 5 years and during those years I realized how hard it is to move up and find a work that I would actually excel and a career to find that I actually love to do. 

Until I've decided to go back to school with the support from my family and took up BSIT back in 2013 and I graduated in 2016. I initially like the idea of being an Android Developer but it got me frustrated because it didn't felt like I was going to be good at it. But then, one semester have passed and I took a class in Cisco Networking. I found the lessons to be challenging and I love it! I said to myself that this is the career that I want to pursue. 

Fast forward to now, I am currently a lead to my fellow Junior Network Engineers and I hold three certifications that I never imagined that I will obtain and a bright future I can't wait to look forward to. But without the self-discipline that I developed and the unconditional support that I received from my family, friends and colleagues it wouldn't be possible for me to achieve these things. 

Impact of Cisco Certification

I had a rough start after I graduated, there are many things that I didn't know and the competition is very stiff. There are also plenty of fresh graduates like myself and other job seekers who already have some IT experience. I initially applied for about 1-2 jobs and got rejected. The reality is that your college diploma can only help you in a certain extent of your job hunting but it is not the only key for you to land a job and this applies to other courses as well. 

One of the things that I have learned is that without experience, you need to have an advantage for you to  eventually get noticed and land an interview. I said to myself, "I need to know what advantage I should have to get ahead with fellow job hunters." Through some internet search, I have come across with different forums and it advised "Get your CCNA" to a fellow who asked my same question. The exam costs $300 or about 16-17 thousand Pesos at that time. I didn't have the money to spend but while saving I started studying anyway in 1-2 months specifically with the networking fundamentals. 

I also started brushing up my resume. I only put the topics that I really know as part of my proficiency and I start getting calls from my job applications. I only put in 2-3 applications at a time so that I can have a focus on what are they looking for and to research about the company. I finally had my lucky break and was able to pass the preliminary exam which has CCNA topics and go through the interview process and I was able to use my prior experience as a call center agent to talk through the interview and my CCNA knowledge to articulate my answers with their technical questions and was able to get the job offer even without a certification. 

I eventually took the exam after I was able to save and it took me 6 months in order to prepare and pass.
I have met fellow engineers, seniors and bosses who share the same passion and eventually opened many doors to explore in the IT industry. I know that my story will be different than yours but one thing is for sure, you will deal with a lot hardships. 

I'm here to give you insights based on my experience and one thing is constant, you have to keep up with the latest technology and skills else you are going to fade in this industry. CCNA is just the tip of the iceberg but having the knowledge will help you develop your critical thinking, troubleshooting and communication skills as well as to demonstrate that you can absorb the essential technical details as a future network engineer and other career paths you can take with it. 


CCNA Experience: Study Technique and Learning Materials 

What is Cisco Certification?

Maybe you're wondering right now, what is Cisco Certification? What is CCNA? Why do I have to learn it? What's with these pre-requisite topics I need to learn? Exactly how can this impact my career? 

Cisco certifications are the list of the Certifications offered by Cisco Systems. CCNA stands for Cisco Certified Networking Associate, You hear me say words like must learn, general, and fundamental right? This is because there's a hierarchy on Cisco certifications and CCNA Routing & Switching is their most popular entry-level certification which gives you 3 years its validity. Having the certification means you have general understanding on networking technologies and how routers, switches work and protocols used on these devices and some are Cisco proprietary implementations. CCNP or Cisco Certified Networking Professional on the other hand is for mid level to senior level IT professionals and should only be taken if you have at 3 or more years experience on working with enterprise scale networks. CCIE and CCAr are experts and Architects which can be compared to Master's and Doctorate degree level of the certification and only few attempts them due to the level of difficulty, the expenses and a lot of time for preparing and passing the exam. 

CCNA
CCNP
CCIE
CCAr




Study Technique

The first and the most difficult part of getting your CCNA is starting to study for it. Seeing the syllabus and the covered topics made me question my own capability whether I can pass the exam or even understand those topics. But then, I started to think that I don't want to end up on a menial job or not achieve my dreams, to disappoint everyone who has high hopes for me and also the money spent when I went back to school. It gave the motivation to start to try and eventually develop a studying habit. 


I have applied one effective studying technique which I really liked which is called Pomodoro Technique. First is that you will pick a topic to study and divide it into chunks. One pomodoro will allot 25 minutes to study without interruption. After doing it, you will take a 5 minute break and you are to do 3-4 pomodoros and take a 30 minute break or longer. This studying technique helped a lot not by just studying but also applied it on my work. This helped a lot on my productivity but this can vary individually but this technique is worth trying for. 

In the process of getting my certs I have sacrificed a lot. I have dedicated about 2-3 hours of study for 6 days in a week. I missed a lot of social gatherings, always sleep deprived, and even time for my family especially my wife. A lot of times you will feel frustrated that's why also taking time off and making time with things you like will lessen or remove that feeling of burnout. 

But passing that difficult exam and conquering something is one of the most satisfying feeling you'll ever get and it will motivate you to study more and obtain more certs. 

CCNA and Learning Materials

The most important topic and the first that you should learn is the OSI Model. The foundation of networking and other IT discipline starts from learning its 7 layers. As an aspiring network professional, our focus is from Layer 1-4 of the OSI model. For the context of CCNA certification, from the encapsulation and decapsulation of data, the transport protocol that will be used for the application which the data is for, how it will be sent out to the internet and hop into different networks through the internet provider, how switching will determine the path to the destination on the local network up to these data getting converted into electrical impulses on a wired ethernet connection is the core knowledge that you should know by heart and I mean it when I say by heart. 

The next thing to learn is routing and switching. How these two function and what are their differences. 

With routers, from how it moves the packet from network to network, populating the routing table to determine on how to route packets, the administrative distance to determine the believability of a route, difference between static and dynamic routing and its protocols should be thoroughly studied or at least these concepts are grasped. Common routing protocols that a CCNA aspiree should know are RIP, RIPv2, OSPF, EIGRP(Interior Gateway Protocols) and BGP(Exterior Gateway Protocols). On the way of learning from routers is to be well-versed on IPV4 and IPV6 addressing. This is must learn topic.

Switching architecture, how it populates its table, different methods of switch packet forwarding and common switching protocols such as Switchport, VLANs, STP and multi-layer switching should be considered as well. Layer 2 protocols worth studying are ARP, Ethernet, and MAC. 

From that fundamental knowledge, you are ready to take on the remaining topics in order to prepare for the exam.

Having a CCNA Routing & Switching cert will give you sufficient knowledge for any entry-level Networking jobs and will give you an advantage passing through HR filters from your potential employers.

You can have two options on taking the CCNAv3 exam. The first one is the 2 way exam, which is CCENT 100-105 ICND1(Interconnecting Cisco Devices) exam and 200-105 ICND2 exam. This is the preferred way for fresh graduates since it divides the CCNA exam into two. And the other one is the CCNA Composite exam or 200-125 which is the route I took. The reason I took the Composite Exam is due to the fact that I already have hands-on experience and studied before I got my my job. 


Learning Materials

If you are going to do a google search for "learn CCNA", you will see a lot of video tutorials, books and other sources. The first thing is to not get bombarded with this. But what I recommend is that you should have the following for studying CCNA:

1 2 Books/E-books
1 Video Course
Hands-on/ Simulation/Emulation labs

The materials that I used are the following:

Books
CCNA Routing & Switching Complete Review Guide 2nd Edition by Todd Lammle
OCG(Official Cert Guide) CCNA Routing ICND1 and 2 by Wendell Odom

Video
CCNA 2018 200-125 Video Bootcamp by Chris Bryant on Udemy

Packet Tracer Labs from Cisco Netacad

Your learning materials will differ depending how much you are willing to spend but with some internet search you can find a lot of sites which has these content. There are also CCNA bootcamps you can attend such as RivanIT and Converge Training and IT Services. 

Bootcamps are expensive as they range from 20-40k including the exam fees but there are many things you can take advantage on this. Aside from hands-on experience, and learning materials they will provide you will also get to meet fellow CCNA takers and you can network with a lot of people already in the IT industry. But if you are like me who is on a limited budget you can take the route of doing self-study. 

I acquired those books through my colleagues. The reason to have 2 books is because Wendell Odom's book is very comprehensive but too dry to read while Todd Lammle's book is I can say is for wrapping up your knowledge since his content is more like supplemental and his explanations are fun to read. 

I bought a CCNA video tutorial from Udemy by the time it only costs around $10 or 500+  pesos  in order to have a better understanding of the topics and the Netacad Packet Tracer labs came from Comlab here in Baste. I used this to apply the knowledge and try some exercises to see how things work. 

Simulation is not limited to Packet Tracer, there are others available such as Boson Netsim which isn't free but offers more capabilities like having the most updated router and switches model, and a community where you can share your own lab and user others as well. Emulation software such as GNS3 and Eve-NG have capabilities where you can use an actual image of a Cisco device and any other vendors and you can build an actual topology on it. 

CCNA Career Path 

Now that we have covered CCNA certification, we can discuss what are the career paths you can take having that knowledge and assuming you have already gained 1-2 years of experience on networking. 

CCNA Routing and Switching Potential jobs: 
Network Analyst
NOC(Network Operations Center) Engineer
Network Administrator
Junior- level Network Engineer

There are a number of other CCNA certs but I will only discuss the most common and the current IT trend as the following certs are the most commonly pursued after the Routing & Switching. I cannot tell you a lot but I can give you the overview and the positions so you can have plan ahead on your long term career goals. 

CCDA Cisco Certified Design Associate
As defined by Cisco, CCDA is a certification is for network design engineers, technicians, and support engineers, who require a basic understanding of network design fundamentals. The CCDA curriculum focuses on but is not limited to designing basic campus, data center, security, voice, and wireless networks.

Potential jobs:
Network Engineer(Design and Architecture)
Sr. Network Engineer
Network Security Engineer
Network Architect
Technical Support Engineer

This certification is for IT Networking professionals who aims to get on the Network Design which requires some experience with troubleshooting complex networks. 

CCNA Collaboration
CCNA Collaboration certification is for network video engineers, IP telephony and IP network engineers who want to develop and advance their collaboration and video skills in line with the convergence of voice, video, data and mobile applications.

This is for those who want to specialize on networks that carries video/voice data. The call center industry is the best example that requires these skilled individuals because their main revenue relies on the delivery of their services through routing of calls and a minute of disruption can cause them money and their client's trust.

Potential jobs: 
Network Engineer
Voice/Video Engineer
Cisco Collaboration/Communications Engineer
Cisco UCCE(Unified Contact Center Enterprise) Engineer

CCNA Security
With a CCNA Security certification, a network professional demonstrates the skills required to develop a security infrastructure, recognize threats and vulnerabilities to networks, and mitigate security threats. The CCNA Security curriculum emphasizes core security technologies, the installation, troubleshooting and monitoring of network devices to maintain integrity, confidentiality and availability of data and devices, and competency in the technologies that Cisco uses in its security structure.

CCNA Security focuses on network security with the goal of protecting an organization from security threats. Knowledge from these certification will make you proficient in administering Cisco Firewalls such as Cisco ASA and their next-generation firewalls such as Cisco Firepower devices. 

Potential Jobs: 
Network Engineer
Network Security Engineer
Firewall Administrator


CCNA Cyber Ops
Today's organizations are challenged with rapidly detecting cybersecurity breaches and effectively responding to security incidents. Teams of people in Security Operations Centers (SOC’s) keep a vigilant eye on security systems, protecting their organizations by detecting and responding to cybersecurity threats. CCNA Cyber Ops prepares candidates to begin a career working with associate-level cybersecurity analysts within security operations centers. 

Cisco is starting to take its stance when it comes to cybersecurity. In fact last year, they gave away cybersecurity scholarships worth $10 Million Dollars which I'm one of the recipients! Imagine the investment to help increase the talent pool of cyber security professionals it definitely means that there are lots of position to fill as cybersecurity threats are becoming more complex and hard to detect. 

Potential Jobs: 
SOC(Security Operations Center)
Security Analyst
Information Security Engineer
Incident Response Analyst


Special Mentions:

CCNP Routing and Switching
This certification is for mid - senior level Network Engineer roles. It covers topics from CCNA Routing & Switching but on a deeper level and as I mentioned you should have prior experience when taking the exam.

Devops

Devops is now getting its attention throughout the IT industry, It is combining software development(Dev) and IT operations(Ops or Operations) and its aim is to improve efficiency and making IT implementations faster and easier to manage. The usual set up is that IT infrastructure runs on different operating systems and vendors thus the challenge of managing them is time-consuming. This is one of the many problems that Devops is trying to solve. In the context of networking, the IT infrastructure(routers, switches, firewalls etc.) are going to be treated as a software code and the people that manages those devices will have flexible options to apply changes either remotely or system-wide. 

In order to get to this track, you need to have experience managing networks and also an understanding with programming. Python is currently the programming language widely used by Devops. Cisco and other vendors are now slowly embracing this changes. 

Conclusion
I will provide you resources for those topics I so that you can plan and choose your IT career and work on your dream job! So, start to build that studying habit, learn the base knowledge of networking, take the exam, go land your job in IT networking and choose your path from there. You can't do this alone so don't be afraid to get that support from your friends and family.

Students and faculty of CSD, again thank you so much for the opportunity to share my story and I hope I inspired each and everyone of you. There are a lot of opportunities waiting for you I am looking forward to see you in the IT industry. The future is bright!  
